WIP: Protocols suite (#10)
cardano-lightning/blog: pages/blog/protocols-suite.md

From that angle it seems reasonable to be really focused on the spec and cut the number of flavours and build an umbrella protocol which can be used in different contexts (like HTTP or Bitcoin Lightning Network L2 node-to-node).
However, in the case of Cardano Lightning, when we looked really closely at two specific strains of the lightning channels we discovered that they offer different trade-offs which are worth keeping separate. Let's first consider the use cases and then the protocols themselves.

## Meet the Users

Not everyone uses a payment protocol the same way.

The Casual Spender wants to make payments easily. They need a simple mobile/desktop app (ideally integrated with their wallet) that allows them to quickly launch and pay. They occasionally top up their balance, but their main goal is simplicity. They don’t want to run a complex software or background processes which constantly monitor the blockchain. Their Liquidity at stake in this case is usually smallish so they can trust third party API providers to sync with the blockchain.

> The High-Throughput Payment Gateway - a payment processors which allow other users to transfer liquidity - has completely different needs. It is a node which forms a backbone of the network together with other similar nodes. They mediate payments for many customers and merchants. They need to handle large volumes of payments in both directions (from the neighbour or to it), maintain good liquidity (keep money in channels with high volume of traffic), and optimize for efficiency (like processing and communication speed, batched L1 operations etc.). They are willing to run more demanding software if it brings operational benefits. They profit relies on the liquidity which they provide and its movement (they cut fee per the amount of money routed through them).

Reviewer: ```
they profit ==> Their profit
```

> <!-- Not sure if we should preserve the below paragraph - it completes the picture but on the other hand messes the structure the simple dichotomy between protocol flavors. -->

Reviewer: Maybe we could condense it? 

Merchants form a third category. There is a likely a spectrum of feature sets within this category, 
with some wanting only the simplest set-up such as unidirectional channels to receive payment, 
while others wanting bidirectionality, perhaps to pay their suppliers _etc_

There are also Merchants who are somewhat in between regarding the requirements. They need to be online and able to receive payments, but usually the volume of payments is not as high as for the High-Throughput Payment Gateway, and liquidity flow is not as dynamic and critical. These users though could benefit from bidirectional flow as they can actually order supplies and pay for them using the same channels or execute refunds. At the end we can classify them as a group which can sometimes effort running a more complex software like payment gateways where their volumes are high or they can be closer to the Casual Spender when their volumes are low and they want to keep things simple. We account Merchants into a heavy node category in here.

These two strategies have fundamentally different requirements.

## The Two Protocols

### Unidirectional Channels

For the casual spender, unidirectional channels are often the perfect fit.

> In this design, the customer locks funds once and then sends a series of signed "cheques" that can only flow in one direction. Once a cheque is issued, it cannot be taken back - it is impossible to tear down a signed digital message and keep the protocol simple. Because the commitments are made by the customer only, the final version of the L2 story is just a "pile of cheques" that the recipient (like intermediary node - Payment Gateway) has to present to the cashier-blockchain smart contract to **instantly** get the money. Because the unidirectional commitment flow does not enforce an extra delay it facilitates nicely more dynamic liquidity management and batching of a recipient.

Reviewer: small style hint: too many sentences starting with because. best not, but can get away with it once.

> Additionally as long as the other end accepted the payment, the customer does not really care about the state of the channel on the blockchain - nothing really beside he committed to pay can be withdrawn from the channel. The communication with L1 can be minimized to the individual events like opening, topping up or final withdrawal of the remaining balance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally as long as the other end accepted the payment, the customer does not really care about the state of the channel on the blockchain. Nothing more than the amount that he committed to pay can be withdrawn from the channel. The communication with L1 can be minimized to the individual events like opening, topping up or final withdrawal of the remaining balance.
```

At the end their lighting wallet app can remain very lightweight and doesn't need to constantly watch the blockchain and can rely on "somewhat trusted" third party L1 connector APIs like Blockfrost, Cardanoscan or Cexplorer.io to execute the charging transactions or the final withdrawal. It can do this without any risk of losing money.

There is of course a downside to this simplicity - the channel is unidirectional, so the customer cannot receive payments or receive **easily** refunds in a trust less way.

> <!-- Sholud we mention a simple flow here with a bit of trust and a more complex trust less flow of paybacks with squashing? -->

Reviewer: I think the main point is clear

## Bidirectional Channels

When both sides need to send and receive payments intensely, bidirectional channels become much more attractive. These channels allow money to flow freely in both directions. One important aspect of these channels is that the liquidity flows in opposite directions can naturally balance each other:

* Let's say that Alice locked 10 ADA and Bob locked 10 ADA in a bidirectional channel (so the on-chain amount locked at the smart contract is 20 ADA total).

> * If Alice gives a off-chain cheque for 10 ADA to Bob, then she can not send any more payments to Bob because the baking on the L1 covers only that 10 ADA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If Alice gives an off-chain cheque for 10 ADA to Bob, then she can not send any more payments to Bob because the backing on the L1 covers only that 10 ADA.
```

* When Bobs issues a off-chain cheque for 7 ADA to Alice, then in some sense those two cheques partially cancel each other and the on-chain 20 ADA is now sufficient to cover some future payments in both directions. Alice has 7 ADA and Bob has 13 ADA to spend.

> This makes them especially useful between routing nodes, where traffic can naturally balance over time. They also enable fully trust less refunds and cancellations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This makes them especially useful between routing nodes, where traffic can naturally balance over time. They also enable fully trustless refunds and cancellations.
```

Author: Corrected every occurrence. Thanks!

* Channels can stay open much longer as payments in opposite directions can naturally balance each other
* Requires both parties to stay synchronized and monitor the chain
* More complex security model — both sides must be ready to respond during the settlement window
-->

## Other flavors

There are even more possible categories of  lightning channels which can be distinguished based on compostability (a prominent example is https://subbit.xyz by @waalge) or multi token support (our protocols support different tokens but are mono asset - either USDM, ADA or some other **specific** token can flow through a particular channel). We want to stop here for now though as we think that the two flavours described above are the most important ones.

After seeing these differences, our design philosophy becomes clear.
Instead of forcing everyone into one universal bidirectional protocol, we are sticking at the moment to two protocols. Each flavour is optimized for specific user needs — from simple spending to high-throughput routing. We believe this approach brings significant benefits in simplicity, performance, and ultimately adoption. The time will tell if we are right.

> <!-- Should we include section like the stub below to actually do some advertising of our work:

Reviewer: Fine either way
